@paragraphindent 0

@node Exception Handling
@chapter Exception Handling, Assertions, Logging, and Sanitization
@cindex exception facilities
@cindex logging facilities
@cindex assertion facilities
@cindex memory sanitisation facilities

No matter how well a program is designed, if it has to interact with a user or
other aspect of the outside world in any way, the code is bound to
occasionally meet with cases that are either invalid or just plain unexpected.
A very simple example is when a program asks the user to enter a filename, and
the user enters the name of a file that does not exist, or does not enter a
name at all.  Perhaps a valid filename @i{is} entered, but, due to a previous
disk write error the contents are garbled.  Any number of things can go wrong.
In addition, programmer error inevitably occurs and needs to be taken account
of.  Internal functions may be called with invalid arguments, either due to
unexpected paths being taken through the code, or silly things like typos
using the wrong variable for something.  When these problems happen (and they
@i{will} happen), it is better to handle them gracefully than for the program
to crash, or worse, to continue processing but in an erroneous way.

To allow for this, many computer languages provide two types of facilities.
The first is referred to as @i{exception handling} or sometimes @i{error
trapping}.  The second is referred to as @i{assertion checking}.  Exceptions
allow the program to catch errors when they occur and react to them
explicitly.  Assertions allow a programmer to establish that certain
conditions hold before attempting to execute a particular operation.  GNUstep
provides both of these facilities, and we will cover each in turn.  The
assertion facility is tied in with the GNUstep @i{logging} facilities, so we
describe those as well.

To use any of the facilities described in this chapter requires that you
include @code{Foundation/NSException.h}.


@section Exceptions
@cindex exceptions
@cindex NSException class
@cindex NS_DURING macro
@cindex NS_HANDLER macro
@cindex NS_ENDHANDLER macro
@cindex NSUncaughtExceptionHandler

GNUstep exception handling provides for two things:

@enumerate
@item
When an error condition is detected during execution, control is passed to a
special error-handling routine, which is given information on the error that
occurred.
@item
This routine may itself, if it chooses, pass this information up the function
call stack to the next higher level of control.  Often higher level code is
more aware of the context in which the error is occurring, and can therefore
make a better decision as to how to react.
@end enumerate


@subsection Catching and Handling Exceptions

GNUstep exception handling is implemented through the macros @code{NS_DURING},
@code{NS_HANDLER}, and @code{NS_ENDHANDLER} in conjunction with the
@code{NSException} class.  The following illustrates the pattern:

@example
NS_DURING
  @{
    // do something risky ...
  @}
NS_HANDLER
  @{
    // a problem occurred; inform user or take another tack ...
  @}
NS_ENDHANDLER
  // back to normal code...
@end example

For instance:

@example
- (DataTree *) readDataFile: (String *)filename
@{
  ParseTree *parse = nil;
  NS_DURING
    @{
      FileHandle *handle = [self getFileHandle: filename];
      parse = [parser parseFile: handle];
      if (parse == nil)
        @{
          NS_VALUERETURN(nil);
        @}
    @}
  NS_HANDLER
    @{
      if ([[localException name] isEqualToString: MyFileNotFoundException])
        @{
          return [self readDataFile: fallbackFilename];
        @}
      else if ([[localException name] isEqualToString: NSParseErrorException])
        @{
          return [self readDataFileInOldFormat: filename];
        @}
      else
        @{
          [localException raise];
        @}
    @}
  NS_ENDHANDLER
  return [[DataTree alloc] initFromParseTree: parse];
@}
@end example

Here, a file is parsed, with the possibility of at least two different errors:
not finding the file and the file being misformatted.  If a problem does
occur, the code in the @code{NS_HANDLER} block is jumped to.  Information on
the error is passed to this code in the @code{localException} variable, which
is an instance of @code{NSException}.  The handler code examines the name of
the exception to determine if it can implement a work-around.  In the first
two cases, an alternative approach is available, and so an alternative value 
is returned.

If the file is found but the parse simply produces a nil parse tree, the
@code{NS_VALUERETURN} macro is used to return nil to the
@code{readDataFile:} caller.  Note that it is @i{not} allowed to simply write
``@code{return nil;}'' inside the NS_DURING block, owing to the nature of the
behind-the-scenes C constructs implementing the mechanism (the @code{setjmp()}
and @code{longjmp()} functions).  If you are in a void function not returning
a value, you may use simply ``@code{NS_VOIDRETURN}'' instead.

Finally, notice
that in the third case above the handler does not recognize the exception
type, so it passes it one level up to the caller by calling @code{-raise} on
the exception object.


@subsection Passing Exceptions Up the Call Stack

If the caller of @code{-readDataFile:} has enclosed the call inside its own
@code{NS_DURING} @dots{} @code{NS_HANDLER} @dots{} @code{NS_ENDHANDLER} block,
it will be able to catch this exception and react to it in the same way as we
saw here.  Being at a higher level of execution, it may be able to take
actions more appropriate than the @code{-readDataFile:} method could have.

If, on the other hand, the caller had @i{not} enclosed the call, it would not
get a chance to react, but the exception would be passed up to the caller of
@i{this} code.  This is repeated until the top control level is reached, and
then as a last resort @code{NSUncaughtExceptionHandler} is called.  This is a
built-in function that will print an error message to the console and exit
the program immediately.  If you don't want this to happen it is possible to
override this function by calling
@code{NSSetUncaughtExceptionHandler(fn_ptr)}.  Here, @code{fn_ptr} should be
the name of a function with this signature (defined in @code{NSException.h}):

@example
void NSUncaughtExceptionHandler(NSException *exception);
@end example

One possibility would be to use this to save files or any other unsaved state
before an application exits because of an unexpected error.


@subsection Where do Exceptions Originate?

You may be wondering at this point where exceptions come from in the first
place.  There are two main possibilities.  The first is from the Base library;
many of its classes raise exceptions when they run into error conditions.  The
second is that application code itself raises them, as described in the next
section.  Exceptions do @i{not} arise automatically from C-style error
conditions generated by C libraries.  Thus, if you for example call the
@code{strtod()} function to convert a C string to a double value, you still
need to check @code{errno} yourself in standard C fashion.

Another case that exceptions are @i{not} raised in is in the course of
messaging.  If a message is sent to @code{nil}, it is silently ignored
without error.  If a message is sent to an object that does not implement it,
the @code{forwardInvocation} method is called instead, as discussed in
@ref{Advanced Messaging}.


@subsection Creating Exceptions

If you want to explicitly create an exception for passing a particular error
condition upwards to calling code, you may simply create an
@code{NSException} object and @code{raise} it:

@example
NSException myException = [[NSException alloc]
                              initWithName: @@"My Exception"
                                    reason: @@"[Description of the cause...]"
                                  userInfo: nil];
[myException raise];
 // code in block after here is unreachable..
@end example

The @code{userInfo} argument here is a @code{NSDictionary} of key-value pairs
containing application-specific additional information about the error.  You
may use this to pass arbitrary arguments within your application.  (Because
this is a convenience for developers, it should have been called
@code{developerInfo}..)

Alternatively, you can create the exception and raise it in one call with
@code{+raise}:

@example
[NSException raise: @@"My Exception"
            format: @@"Parse error occurred at line %d.",lineNumber];
@end example

Here, the @code{format} argument takes a printf-like format analogous to
@code{[NSString -stringWithFormat:]} discussed @ref{Objective-C, previously,
Strings in GNUstep}.  In general, you should not use arbitrary names for
exceptions as shown here but constants that will be recognized throughout your
application.  In fact, GNUstep defines some standard constants for this
purpose in @code{NSException.h}:

@table @code
@item NSCharacterConversionException
An exception when character set conversion fails.
@item NSGenericException
A generic exception for general purpose usage.
@item NSInternalInconsistencyException
An exception for cases where unexpected state is detected within an object.
@item NSInvalidArgumentException
An exception used when an invalid argument is passed to a method or function.
@item NSMallocException
An exception used when the system fails to allocate required memory.
@item NSParseErrorException
An exception used when some form of parsing fails.
@item NSRangeException
An exception used when an out-of-range value is encountered.
@end table

Also, some Foundation classes define their own more specialized exceptions:

@table @code
@item NSFileHandleOperationException (NSFileHandle.h)
An exception used when a file error occurs.
@item NSInvalidArchiveOperationException (NSKeyedArchiver.h)
An archiving error has occurred.
@item NSInvalidUnarchiveOperationException (NSKeyedUnarchiver.h)
An unarchiving error has occurred.
@item NSPortTimeoutException (NSPort.h)
Exception raised if a timeout occurs during a port send or receive operation.
@item NSUnknownKeyException (NSKeyValueCoding.h)
 An exception for an unknown key.
@end table


@subsection When to Use Exceptions

As might be evident from the @code{-readDataFile:} example above, if a
certain exception can be anticipated, it can also be checked for, so you
don't necessarily need the exception mechanism.  You may want to use
exceptions anyway if it simplifies the code paths.  It is also good practice
to catch exceptions when it can be seen that an unexpected problem might
arise, as any time file, network, or database operations are undertaken, for
instance.

Another important case where exceptions are useful is when you need to pass
detailed information up to the calling method so that it can react
appropriately.  Without the ability to raise an exception, you are limited to
the standard C mechanism of returning a value that will hopefully be
recognized as invalid, and perhaps using an @code{errno}-like strategy where
the caller knows to examine the value of a certain global variable.  This is
inelegant, difficult to enforce, and leads to the need, with void methods, to
document that ``the caller should check @code{errno} to see if any problems
arose''.


@section Logging
@cindex logging
@cindex NSLog function
@cindex NSDebugLog function
@cindex NSWarnLog function
@cindex profiling facilities

GNUstep provides several distinct logging facilities best suited for different
purposes.

@subsection NSLog

The simplest of these is the @code{NSLog(NSString *format, ...)}  function.
For example:

@example
NSLog(@@"Error occurred reading file at line %d.", lineNumber);
@end example

This would produce, on the console (stderr) of the application calling it,
something like:

@example
2004-05-08 22:46:14.294 SomeApp[15495] Error occurred reading file at line 20.
@end example

The behavior of this function may be controlled in two ways.  First, the user
default @code{GSLogSyslog} can be set to ``@code{YES}'', which will send
these messages to the syslog on systems that support that (Unix variants).
Second, the function GNUstep uses to write the log messages can be
overridden, or the file descriptor the existing function writes to can be
overridden:
@comment{Need ref to where user defaults are explained.}

@example
  // these changes must be enclosed within a lock for thread safety
NSLock *logLock = GSLogLock();
[logLock lock];

  // to change the file descriptor:
_NSLogDescriptor = <fileDescriptor>;
  // to change the function itself:
_NSLog_printf_handler = <functionName>;

[logLock unlock];
@end example

Due to locking mechanisms used by the logging facility, you should protect
these changes using the lock provided by @code{GSLogLock()} (see @ref{Base
Library, , Threads and Run Control} on locking).

The @code{NSLog} function was defined in OpenStep and is also available in Mac
OS X Cocoa, although the overrides described above may not be.  The next set of
logging facilities to be described are only available under GNUstep.


@subsection NSDebugLog, NSWarnLog

The facilities provided by the @code{NSDebugLog} and @code{NSWarnLog} families
of functions support source code method name and line-number reporting and
allow compile- and run-time control over logging level.

The @code{NSDebugLog} functions are enabled at compile time by default.  To
turn them off, set @code{'diagnose = no'} in your makefile, or undefine
@code{GSDIAGNOSE} in your code before including @code{NSDebug.h}.  To turn
them off at runtime, call @code{[[NSProcessInfo processInfo]
setDebugLoggingEnabled: NO]}.  (An @code{NSProcessInfo} instance is
automatically instantiated in a running GNUstep application and may be
obtained by invoking @code{[NSProcessInfo processInfo]}.)

At runtime, whether or not logging is enabled, a debug log method is called
like this:

@example
NSDebugLLog(@@"ParseError", @@"Error parsing file at line %d.", lineNumber);
@end example

Here, the first argument to @code{NSDebugLog}, ``@code{ParseError}'', is a
string @i{key} that specifies the category of message.  The message will only
actually be logged (through a call to @code{NSLog()}) if this key is in the
set of active debug categories maintained by the @code{NSProcessInfo} object
for the application.  Normally, this list is empty.  There are
three ways for string keys to make it onto this list:

@itemize
@item
Provide one or more startup arguments of the form @code{--GNU-Debug=<key>} to
the program.  These are processed by GNUstep and removed from the argument
list before any user code sees them.
@item
Call @code{[NSProcessInfo debugSet]} at runtime, which returns an
@code{NSMutableSet}.  You can add (or remove) strings to this set directly.
@item
The @code{GNU-Debug} user default nay contain a comma-separated list of keys.
However, note that @code{[NSUserDefaults standardUserDefaults]} must first be
called before this will take effect (to read in the defaults initially).
@end itemize

While any string can be used as a debug key, conventionally three types of
keys are commonly used.  The first type expresses a ``level of importance''
for the message, for example, ``Debug'', ``Info'', ``Warn'', or ``Error''.
The second type of key that is used is class name.  The GNUstep Base classes
used this approach.  For example if you want to activate debug messages for
the @code{NSBundle}'' class, simply add '@code{NSBundle}' to the list of keys.
The third category of key is the default key, '@code{dflt}'.  This key can be
used whenever the specificity of the other key types is not required.  Note
that it still needs to be turned on like any other logging key before
messages will actually be logged.

There is a family of @code{NSDebugLog} functions with slightly differing
behaviors:

@table @code
@item NSDebugLLog(key, format, args,...)
Basic debug log function already discussed.
@item NSDebugLog(format, args,...)
Equivalent to @code{NSDebugLLog} with key ``dflt'' (for default).
@item NSDebugMLLog(key, format, args,...)
Equivalent to @code{NSDebugLLog} but includes information on which method the
logging call was made from in the message.
@item NSDebugMLog(format, args,...)
Same, but use 'dflt' log key.
@item NSDebugFLLog(key, format, args,...)
As @code{NSDebugMLLog} but includes information on a function rather than a
method.
@item NSDebugFLog(format, args,...)
As previous but using 'dflt' log key.
@end table

The implementations of the @code{NSDebugLog} functions are optimized so that
they consume little time when logging is turned off.  In particular, if debug
logging is deactivated at compile time, there is NO performance cost, and if
it is completely deactivated at runtime, each call entails only a boolean
test.  Thus, they can be left in production code.

There is also a family of @code{NSWarn} functions.  They are similar to the
@code{NSDebug} functions except that they do not take a key.  Instead, warning
messages are shown by default unless they are disabled at compile time by
setting @code{'warn = no'} or undefining @code{GSWARN}, or at runtime by
@i{adding} ``@code{NoWarn}'' to @code{[NSProcessInfo debugSet]}.
(Command-line argument @code{--GNU-Debug=NoWarn} and adding ``NoWarn'' to the
@code{GNU-Debug} user default will also work.)  @code{NSWarnLog()},
@code{NSWarnLLog()}, @code{NSWarnMLLog}, @code{NSWarnMLog},
@code{NSWarnFLLog}, and @code{NSWarnFLog} are all similar to their
@code{NSDebugLog} counterparts.


@subsection Last Resorts: GSPrintf and fprintf

Both the @code{NSDebugLog} and the simpler @code{NSLog} facilities utilize a
fair amount of machinery - they provide locking and timestamping for example.
Sometimes this is not appropriate, or might be too heavyweight in a case where
you are logging an error which might involve the application being in some
semi-undefined state with corrupted memory or worse.  You can use the
@code{GSPrintf()} function, which simply converts a format string to UTF-8 and
writes it to a given file:

@example
GSPrintf(stderr, "Error at line %d.", n);
@end example

If even this might be too much (it uses the @code{NSString} and @code{NSData}
classes), you can always use the C function @code{fprintf()}:

@example
fprintf(stderr, "Error at line %d.", n);
@end example

Except under extreme circumstances, the preferred logging approach is either
@code{NSDebugLog}/@code{NSWarnLog}, due the the compile- and run-time
configurability they offer, or @code{NSLog}.


@subsection Profiling Facilities

GNUstep supports optional programmatic access to object allocation
statistics.  To initiate collection of statistics, call the function
@code{GSDebugAllocationActive(BOOL active)} with an argument of
``@code{YES}''.  To turn it off, call it with ``@code{NO}''.  The overhead
of statistics collection is only incurred when it is active.  To access the
statistics, use the set of @code{GSDebugAllocation...()} functions defined in
@code{NSDebug.h}.

In addition to basic statistics (but at higher performance cose), the
@code{GSDebugAllocation...()} functions provide detailed records of when and
where objects are allocated/deallocated.  This can be useful when debugging
for memory leaks.

Finally, for pinpoint accuracy, the -trackOwnership method can be called on
an individual object to turn on tracking of the lifetime of that object. In
this case a stack trace is printed logging every ownership event (retain,
release, or dealloc) and a log is printed at process exit if the object
has not been deallocated.  The same method may be called on a class to
track every object of that class.  This method is declared in
@code{NSObject+GNUstepBase.h}.  Tracking the life of an individual object is
particularly useful if a leak checker (eg when your program was built using
@code{(make asan=yes)} or run under valgrind) has reported a leak and the
cause of the leak is hard to find:  the leak checker will have told you the
stack trace where the leaked memory was allocated, so you can change your
code to start tracking immediately after that and see exactly what happened
to the object ownership after its creation.

@section Assertions
@cindex assertions
@cindex NSAssert macro
@cindex NSAssertionHandler class

Assertions provide a way for the developer to state that certain conditions
must hold at a certain point in source code execution.  If the conditions do
not hold, an exception is automatically raised (and succeeding code in the
block is not executed).  This avoids an operation from taking place with
illegal inputs that may lead to worse problems later.

The use of assertions is generally accepted to be an efficient means of
improving code quality, for, like unit testing, they can help rapidly uncover
a developer's implicit or mistaken assumptions about program behavior.
However this is only true to the extent that you carefully design the nature
and placement of your assertions.  There is an excellent discussion of this
issue bundled in the documentation with Sun's Java distribution.
@comment{Add link to appropriate java.sun.com page.}

@subsection Assertions and their Handling

Assertions allow the developer to establish that certain conditions hold
before undertaking an operation.  In GNUstep, the standard means to make an
assertion is to use the @code{NSAssert} or @code{NSCAssert} macros.  The
general form of these macros is:

@example
NSAssert(<boolean test>, <formatString>, <argumentsToFormat>);
@end example

For instance:

@example
NSAssert(x == 10, "X should have been 10, but it was %d.", x);
@end example

If the test '@code{x == 10}' evaluates to @code{true}, @code{NSLog()} is
called with information on the method and line number of the failure, together
with the format string and argument.  The resulting console message will look
like this:

@example
Foo.m:126  Assertion failed in Foo(instance), method Bar.  X should have been
10, but it was 5.
@end example

After this is logged, an exception is raised of type
'@code{NSInternalInconsistencyException}', with this string as its
description.

If you need to make an assertion inside a regular C function (not an
Objective-C method), use the equivalent macro @code{NSCAssert()}, etc..

@i{@b{Note}}, you can completely disable assertions (saving the time for the
boolean test and avoiding the exception if fails) by putting @code{#define
NS_BLOCK_ASSERTIONS} before you include @code{NSException.h}.


@subsection Custom Assertion Handling

The aforementioned behavior of logging an assertion failure and raising an
exception can be overridden if desired.  You need to create a subclass of
@code{NSAssertionHandler} and register an instance in each thread in which
you wish the handler to be used.  This is done by calling:

@example
[[[NSThread currentThread] threadDictionary]
    setObject:myAssertionHandlerInstance forKey:@"NSAssertionHandler"];
@end example

See @ref{Base Library, , Threads and Run Control} for more information on what
this is doing.

@page

@subsection Comparison with Java
@cindex exception handling, compared with Java
@cindex logging, compared with Java
@cindex assertion handling, compared with Java

GNUstep's exception handling facilities are, modulo syntax, equivalent to
those in Java in all but three respects:

@itemize
@item
There is no provision for a ``finally'' block executed after either the main
code or the exception handler code.
@item
You cannot declare the exception types that could be raised by a method in its
signature.  In Java this is possible and the compiler uses this to enforce
that a caller should catch exceptions if they might be generated by a method.
@item
Correspondingly, there is no support in the @ref{GSDoc, documentation system}
for documenting exceptions potentially raised by a method.  (This will
hopefully be rectified soon.)
@end itemize

The logging facilities provided by @code{NSDebugLog} and company are similar
to but a bit more flexible than those provided in the Java/JDK 1.4 logging APIs,
which were based on the IBM/Apache Log4J project.

The assertion facilities are similar to but a bit more flexible than those in
Java/JDK 1.4 since you can override the assertion handler.

@page

@section Address sanitization
@cindex address sanitization
@cindex memory access

One of the powers of the C family of languages is the existence of pointer
to memory locations containing information, indeed every Objective-C object
variable is a pointer to a memory location containing that object.

Aside from object specific problems, we have the standard problems of C in
that a pointer to memory can result in access violations where we attempt
to read from a memory location that we shouldn’t or write to one that we
shouldn’t.  These operations can cause our program to crash or to misbehave
(if we read from a memory location that doesn’t contain the information we
are expecting).

Modern compilers try to catch such errors and will warn about the more
dangerous looking code.

Operating systems catch some errors, and kill programs which access some
memory locations.

The combination of these mechanisms still doesn’t deal with everything.

@subsection Building with ASAN

The gnustep-make package provides an option (@code{asan=yes}) to build
software with address sanitisation turned on, to catch many more errors
when the program runs.

This causes the compiler to add extra code to check things at runtime (as well as curing the code to link with different libraries to catch errors in the parameters passed to many standard functions).

This is dangerous for production code, because the program will terminate as
soon as such an error (even if it is harmless) is detected, but is a great
feature for a software developer or QA tester to have turned on.

In addition to building individual files or projects using @code{asan=yes} 
gnustep-make understands the environment variable setting
@code{GNUSTEP_WITH_ASAN=1} as turning on building with ASAN.

@page
@subsection Typical address issues

The typical issues detected are buffer overflow (or overrun) where we write to
a location just beyond the start or end of a section of memory allocated by the
malloc() function, and buffer overread where we read beyond the meaningful data.

@example
for (char *ptr = buffer; *ptr != '\0'; ptr++)
  @{
    if (memcmp(ptr, key, keylen) == 0)
      @{
        return 1; // found the key
      @}
  @}
return 0;	// key not found
@end example

The code to search for a key in a buffer containing a nul terminated C-string
may (depending on exactly how memcmp() is implemented) read data beyond the
terminating nul, and possibly outside the memory allocated for the buffer.
This will be detected at runtime by the address sanitizer and cause the
program to stop immediately and print a message to STDERR describing the
location and nature of the problem:

@example
=================================================================
==NNNNNN==ERROR: AddressSanitizer: heap-buffer-overflow on address ...
READ of size N at ...
    #0 ... in MemcmpInterceptorCommon...
    #1 ... in memcmp (/home/username/a+...)...
    #2 ... in main /home/username/a.m:120:40
    ...

... is located N bytes after N-byte region ... allocated by thread ... here:
    #0 ... in malloc ...
    #1 ... in main /home/username/a.m:55:22
    ...

SUMMARY: AddressSanitizer: heap-buffer-overflow ... 
Shadow bytes around the buggy address: ...
@end example

The report says what happened, then gives a stack trace of where it happened,
then a stack trace of where the buffer was allocated, then a summary, and
finally some incomprehensible (unless you want to get deep into the details of
how the address sanitizer works) 'shadow byte' details.

Generally a look at the source code corresponding to the first reported stack
trace, in conjunction with the knowledge of the type of error detected, is
enough to spot the problem so that you can fix it.

@page
@subsection Leak sanitization
@cindex leak sanitization

Leak sanitization is a close cousin to address sanitization. Rather than
attempting to detect general addressing errors of writing to incorrect
locations, it concentrates on the issue of memory allocations which are not
matched by deallocation when the memory is no longer needed.  Memory leaks
typically result in crashes because the system runs out of memory.

Like address sanitization, leak sanitization is turned on by the asan=yes
option in gnustep-make.  Unlike address sanitization, it does not necessarily
have to be turned on while compiling every file, only when compiling an linking
the main executable.

Memory leaks are normally checked at the point when a process is shut down,
but can optionally be checked for and reported by a running process.

Leak sanitization reports are somewhat similar to address sanitization reports:

@example
=================================================================
==NNNNNN==ERROR: LeakSanitizer: detected memory leaks

Direct leak of N byte(s) in N object(s) allocated from:
    #0 ... in malloc (/home/username/a.out+...)...
    #1 ... in main /home/username/a.m:7:19
    #2 ... in __libc_start_call_main ...
    #3 ... in __libc_start_main csu/...
    #4 ... in _start (/home/username/a.out+...)

SUMMARY: AddressSanitizer: N byte(s) leaked in N allocation(s).

@end example

The above example is the approximate format for a program named a.out built
by compiling the source file a.m and shows that the leaked memory was allocated
by a call to malloc() at line 7 column 19 in a.m 

For more information @pxref{Objects,,Working With Objects}

@page
@subsection Drawbacks of ASAN

While address sanitization has great points: helping prevent crashes (writing
to bad locations), program logic errors (reading and making decisions on bad
data), and attacks (specially crafted data deliberately changing program logic),
it also has drawbacks.

@itemize
@item It needs to be turned on when compiling each source file of any library or program.
@item If turned on for a library, that library can only be used with programs
for which it is also turned on.
@item There is no error recovery possible; any detected error causes the program to stop immediately.
@item The extra code for monitoring memory accesses makes your program run at (approximately) half the normal speed.
@item It allocates a huge amount of virtual memory (terabytes) making making it impossible to monitor memory usage by your process using most tools.
@item It uses a lot more real memory to record information about what your process does, possibly causing your system to run out of memory.
@end itemize


