@chapter Announcement

@c set the vars GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION and GNUSTEP-BASE-GCC-VERSION
@include version.tmpl.texi

The GNUstep Base Library, version @value{GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION}, is now
available.

@section What is the GNUstep Base Library?

@include base-desc.texi

There is more information available at the GNUstep homepage
at @samp{http://www.gnustep.org}.

@ignore
So that developers of non-free, commercial programs can use the library,
the library is released under the GNU Library GPL.

So that it can easily be included in non-free, comercial software, the
library is released under the GNU Library GPL.

For more details, see the @samp{README} file that comes with the
distribution.
@end ignore

@section Where can you get it?  How can you compile it?

@ifset GNUSTEP-BASE-FTP-MACHINE
The gstepbase-@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION}.tar.gz distribution file has 
been placed on @samp{@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-FTP-MACHINE}} in
@samp{@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-FTP-DIRECTORY}}.
@end ifset
@ifclear GNUSTEP-BASE-FTP-MACHINE
The libgnustep-base-@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION}.tar.gz distribution file has
been placed on @samp{@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-SNAP-FTP-MACHINE}} in
@samp{@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-SNAP-FTP-DIRECTORY}}.
@end ifclear

The library requires gcc @value{GCC-VERSION} or higher.
Significant sections of the library do not work with the NeXT runtime,
so we recommend using gcc instead of NeXT's cc.  See the @samp{GNUstep-HOWTO}
file for more instructions about compiling and installing the library.

The @samp{.tar} file is compressed with GNU gzip.  Gzip can be obtained by
anonymous ftp at any of the GNU archive sites.

For info about FTP via email, send email to
@samp{ftpmail@@decwrl.dec.com} with no subject line, and two-line body
with line one @samp{help} and line two @samp{quit}.

The most recent (not necessarily tested) snapshots of the library will
be placed on @samp{@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-SNAP-FTP-MACHINE}}.

@format


[ Most GNU software is packed using the GNU `gzip' compression program.
  Source code is available on most sites distributing GNU software.

  For information on how to order GNU software on tape, floppy or cd-rom, or
  printed GNU manuals, check the file etc/ORDERS in the GNU Emacs distribution
  or in GNUinfo/ORDERS on prep, or e-mail a request to: gnu@@prep.ai.mit.edu

  By ordering your GNU software from the FSF, you help us continue to
  develop more free software.  Media revenues are our primary source of
  support.  Donations to FSF are deductible on US tax returns.

  The above software will soon be at these ftp sites as well.
  Please try them before prep.ai.mit.edu as prep is very busy!

  thanx -gnu@@prep.ai.mit.edu

	ASIA: ftp.cs.titech.ac.jp, utsun.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp:/ftpsync/prep,
  cair.kaist.ac.kr:/pub/gnu, ftp.nectec.or.th:/pub/mirrors/gnu
	AUSTRALIA: archie.au:/gnu (archie.oz or archie.oz.au for ACSnet)
	AFRICA: ftp.sun.ac.za:/pub/gnu
	MIDDLE-EAST: ftp.technion.ac.il:/pub/unsupported/gnu
	EUROPE: irisa.irisa.fr:/pub/gnu, ftp.univ-lyon1.fr:pub/gnu,
  ftp.mcc.ac.uk, unix.hensa.ac.uk:/pub/uunet/systems/gnu,
  src.doc.ic.ac.uk:/gnu, ftp.ieunet.ie:pub/gnu, ftp.eunet.ch,
  nic.switch.ch:/mirror/gnu, ftp.informatik.rwth-aachen.de:/pub/gnu,
  ftp.informatik.tu-muenchen.de, ftp.win.tue.nl:/pub/gnu,
  ftp.funet.fi:/pub/gnu, ftp.denet.dk, ftp.stacken.kth.se, isy.liu.se,
  ftp.luth.se:/pub/unix/gnu, ftp.sunet.se:/pub/gnu, archive.eu.net
	SOUTH AMERICA: ftp.unicamp.br:/pub/gnu
	WESTERN CANADA: ftp.cs.ubc.ca:/mirror2/gnu
	USA: wuarchive.wustl.edu:/systems/gnu, labrea.stanford.edu,
  ftp.digex.net:/pub/gnu, ftp.kpc.com:/pub/mirror/gnu, f.ms.uky.edu:/pub3/gnu,
  jaguar.utah.edu:/gnustuff, ftp.hawaii.edu:/mirrors/gnu,
  vixen.cso.uiuc.edu:/gnu, mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu:/pub/gnu,
  ftp.cs.columbia.edu:/archives/gnu/prep, col.hp.com:/mirrors/gnu,
  gatekeeper.dec.com:/pub/GNU, ftp.uu.net:/systems/gnu

]
@end format
