@chapter GNU Objective C Class Library

@c set the vars OBJECTS_VERSION and OBJECTS_GCC_VERSION
@include version.texi

The GNU Objective C Class Library, version @value{OBJECTS_VERSION}, is now
available.

@section What is the GNU Objective C Class Library?

It is a library of general-purpose, non-graphical Objective C objects
designed in the Smalltalk tradition.  It includes collection objects for
maintaining groups of objects and C types, streams for I/O to various
destinations, coders for formating objects and C types to streams, ports
for network packet transmission, distributed objects (remote object
messaging), pseudo-random number generators, and time handling
facilities.

@ignore
So that developers of non-free, commercial programs can use the library,
the library is released under the GNU Library GPL.

So that it can easily be included in non-free, comercial software, the
library is released under the GNU Library GPL.

For more details, see the @samp{README} file that comes with the
distribution.
@end ignore

@c @section What's new in this release?
@include news.texi

@section Where can you get it?  How can you compile it?

@ifset OBJECTS_FTP_MACHINE
The libobjects-@value{OBJECTS_VERSION}.tar.gz distribution file has been
placed on @samp{@value{OBJECTS_FTP_MACHINE}} in
@samp{@value{OBJECTS_FTP_DIRECTORY}}.
@end ifset
@ifclear OBJECTS_FTP_MACHINE
The libobjects-@value{OBJECTS_VERSION}.tar.gz distribution file has not
been made available by anonymous ftp.
@end ifclear

The library requires gcc @value{OBJECTS_GCC_VERSION} or higher.  The
library does not work with the NEXTSTEP 3.2 compiler because that
version of NeXT's cc cannot handle nested functions.  Until a later
release from NeXT, NEXTSTEP users will have to install gcc.  See the
@samp{INSTALL} file for more instructions about compiling and installing
the library.

The library has been successfully compiled and tested with the following
configurations:
@smallexample
  mips-sgi-irix5.2
@end smallexample

Some previous snapshots of the library worked with these configurations,
but they haven't been tested recently:
@smallexample
  sparc-sun-sunos4.1.3
  m68k-next-nextstep3.0
  rs6000-ibm-aix3.2
  sparc-sun-solaris2.3
  i386-unknown-linux
  i386-sun-solaris2.4
  i386-unknown-sysv4.0
@end smallexample

It is known not to work with:
@smallexample
  alpha-dec-osf
@end smallexample

The @samp{.tar} file is compressed with GNU gzip.  Gzip can be obtained by
anonymous ftp at any of the GNU archive sites.

For info about FTP via email, send email to
@samp{ftpmail@@decwrl.dec.com} with no subject line, and two-line body
with line one @samp{help} and line two @samp{quit}.

The most recent (not necessarily tested) snapshots of the library will
be placed in @samp{ftp://alpha.gnu.ai.mit.edu/gnu}.

@display
Happy Hacking!
       R. Andrew McCallum
       mccallum@@gnu.ai.mit.edu
@end display

@format


[ Most GNU software is packed using the GNU `gzip' compression program.
  Source code is available on most sites distributing GNU software.

  For information on how to order GNU software on tape, floppy or cd-rom, or
  printed GNU manuals, check the file etc/ORDERS in the GNU Emacs distribution
  or in GNUinfo/ORDERS on prep, or e-mail a request to: gnu@@prep.ai.mit.edu

  By ordering your GNU software from the FSF, you help us continue to
  develop more free software.  Media revenues are our primary source of
  support.  Donations to FSF are deductible on US tax returns.

  The above software will soon be at these ftp sites as well.
  Please try them before prep.ai.mit.edu as prep is very busy!

  thanx -gnu@@prep.ai.mit.edu

	ASIA: ftp.cs.titech.ac.jp, utsun.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp:/ftpsync/prep,
  cair.kaist.ac.kr:/pub/gnu, ftp.nectec.or.th:/pub/mirrors/gnu
	AUSTRALIA: archie.au:/gnu (archie.oz or archie.oz.au for ACSnet)
	AFRICA: ftp.sun.ac.za:/pub/gnu
	MIDDLE-EAST: ftp.technion.ac.il:/pub/unsupported/gnu
	EUROPE: irisa.irisa.fr:/pub/gnu, ftp.univ-lyon1.fr:pub/gnu,
  ftp.mcc.ac.uk, unix.hensa.ac.uk:/pub/uunet/systems/gnu,
  src.doc.ic.ac.uk:/gnu, ftp.ieunet.ie:pub/gnu, ftp.eunet.ch,
  nic.switch.ch:/mirror/gnu, ftp.informatik.rwth-aachen.de:/pub/gnu,
  ftp.informatik.tu-muenchen.de, ftp.win.tue.nl:/pub/gnu,
  ftp.funet.fi:/pub/gnu, ftp.denet.dk, ftp.stacken.kth.se, isy.liu.se,
  ftp.luth.se:/pub/unix/gnu, ftp.sunet.se:/pub/gnu, archive.eu.net
	SOUTH AMERICA: ftp.unicamp.br:/pub/gnu
	WESTERN CANADA: ftp.cs.ubc.ca:/mirror2/gnu
	USA: wuarchive.wustl.edu:/systems/gnu, labrea.stanford.edu,
  ftp.digex.net:/pub/gnu, ftp.kpc.com:/pub/mirror/gnu, f.ms.uky.edu:/pub3/gnu,
  jaguar.utah.edu:/gnustuff, ftp.hawaii.edu:/mirrors/gnu,
  vixen.cso.uiuc.edu:/gnu, mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu:/pub/gnu,
  ftp.cs.columbia.edu:/archives/gnu/prep, col.hp.com:/mirrors/gnu,
  gatekeeper.dec.com:/pub/GNU, ftp.uu.net:/systems/gnu

]
@end format
