@c This is a generic INSTALL file for utilities distributions.
@c If this package does not come with, e.g., installable documentation or
@c data files, please ignore the references to them below.

@c set the vars GNUSTEP_BASE_VERSION and GNUSTEP_BASE_GCC_VERSION
@include version.texi

@ifset INSTALL_ONLY
This file documents the installation of the GNUstep Base Library,
@samp{libgnustep-base}.  Copyright (C) 1993, 1994, 1996, 1997 Free Software 
Foundation, Inc.  You may copy, distribute, and modify it freely as long
as you preserve this copyright notice and permission notice.
@chapter Installing @samp{libgnustep-base}
@end ifset

To compile and install @samp{libgnustep-base}:

@enumerate

@item
If you are running GNU/Linux, first install pthreads.  A copy that is
known to work with GNU Objective C can be found at
@file{ftp://ftp.ocbi.com/pub/GNUstep/pthreads.tar.gz}
I ignored the installation instructions, and instead did the following:

@example
cd pthreads-0.9.2
tar -cf - lib | (cd /usr/local ; tar -xvf -)
tar -cf - include | (cd /usr/local ; tar -xvf -)
mkdirs /usr/local/src/linux_threads/kits/pthreads-0.9.2/lib/pthreads
cd !$ ; ln -s /usr/local/lib/libpthreads.so.1 .
cd /usr/local/lib ; ln -s libpthreads.so.1 libpthreads.so
@end example

(And on my system, I also had to comment out the code between
@code{#ifndef _TIMESPEC_} and the following @code{#endif} in
@file{/usr/local/include/pthreads/typedefs.h}.)

@item
Then install the GNU Objective C runtime patch (both gcc-2.7.2-objc.diff
and gcc-2.7.2.1-objc.diff are included with this gnustep-base release),
possibly like this:

@example
cd gcc-2.7.2.1
patch -p1 < ../gstep-base*/gcc-2.7.2.1-objc.diff
rm -f objc/list.h
@end example

When I did this, patch exited with code 5, but the only rejects were in
documentation files, not source files.

@item
Make and install gcc, possibly like this:

@example
./configure --prefix=/usr/local
make OBJC_THREAD_FILE=thr-pthreads
make OBJC_THREAD_FILE=thr-pthreads install
@end example

If you are not sure that threads are available on your system, and you
don't need to use threads, you can substitute @samp{thr-single} for
@samp{thr-pthreads}.

@item
Then configure and make libgnustep-base:

@example
./configure --prefix=/usr/local
make
make install
@end example

Alternatively, if you are running GNU/Linux and have an older version of
libc, then the Objective C runtime will not work unless you pass
@samp{-lieee} to the linker.  If you use the pthreads library that will
also have to be linked in.  You can do that like this:

@example
LIBS="-lieee -lpthreads" ./configure --prefix=/usr/local
make
make install
@end example

If you don't have @samp{libieee.a} on your system, @prog{configure} will
say 
@example
configure: error: installation or configuration problem: 
C compiler cannot create executables.
@end example

If you are running on a NeXT machine, @samp{gcc} probably configured
itself to use the NeXT Objective C runtime by default.  Currently
GNUstep only supports the GNU runtime.  To make @samp{gcc} use the GNU
runtime, set @samp{CFLAGS} before you runtime configure.  For example: 

@example
CFLAGS=-fgnu-runtime ./configure 
@end example

If your system supports dynamically loaded shared libraries, you can
request the building and installation of a @samp{.so} version of the
library by passing @samp{--enable-shared} to @samp{configure}.  If in
doubt, do not include this option.  

If you have trouble with the Makefile, it may be that our makefiles use
features that your @code{make} does not support; use GNU make.

@item
Then install libgnustep-base:

@example
make install
@end example

If you set any environment variables when running @samp{make} to build
libgnustep-base, you should set them again here; for example:

@example
CFLAGS=-fgnu-runtime ./configure 
@end example

@end enumerate

Here are general instructions for @file{configure}, that explain
@file{configure}'s options.

@enumerate

@item
Configure the package for your system.  In the directory that this file
is in, type @samp{./configure}.  If you're using @samp{csh} on an old
version of System V, you might need to type @samp{sh configure} instead
to prevent @samp{csh} from trying to execute @samp{configure} itself.

The @samp{configure} shell script attempts to guess correct values for
various system-dependent variables used during compilation, and creates
the Makefile(s) (one in each subdirectory of the source directory).  In
some packages it creates a C header file containing system-dependent
definitions.  It also creates a file @samp{config.status} that you can
run in the future to recreate the current configuration.

Running @samp{configure} takes less than a minute or two.  While it is
running, it prints some messages that tell what it is doing.  If you
don't want to see the messages, run @samp{configure} with its standard
output redirected to @samp{/dev/null}; for example:
@smallexample 
./configure >/dev/null
@end smallexample

To compile the package in a different directory from the one containing
the source code, you must use a version of make that supports the VPATH
variable, such as GNU make.  @samp{cd} to the directory where you want
the object files and executables to go and run @samp{configure}.
@samp{configure} automatically checks for the source code in the
directory that @samp{configure} is in and in @samp{..}.  If for some
reason @samp{configure} is not in the source code directory that you are
configuring, then it will report that it can't find the source code.  In
that case, run @samp{configure} with the option @samp{--srcdir=DIR},
where DIR is the directory that contains the source code.

By default, @samp{make install} will install the package's files in
/usr/local/bin, /usr/local/lib, /usr/local/man, etc.  You can specify
an installation prefix other than /usr/local by giving @samp{configure} the
option @samp{--prefix=PATH}.  Alternately, you can do so by giving a value
for the @samp{prefix} variable when you run @samp{make}, e.g.,
@smallexample
make prefix=/usr/gnu
@end smallexample

You can specify separate installation prefixes for architecture-specific
files and architecture-independent files.  If you give @samp{configure}
the option @samp{--exec_prefix=PATH} or set the @samp{make} variable
@samp{exec_prefix} to PATH, the package will use PATH as the prefix for
installing programs and libraries.  Data files and documentation will
still use the regular prefix.  Normally, all files are installed using
the regular prefix.

You can tell @samp{configure} to figure out the configuration for your
system, and record it in @samp{config.status}, without actually
configuring the package (creating @samp{Makefile}s and perhaps a
configuration header file).  To do this, give @samp{configure} the
@samp{--no-create} option.  Later, you can run @samp{./config.status} to
actually configure the package.  This option is useful mainly in
@samp{Makefile} rules for updating @samp{config.status} and
@samp{Makefile}.  You can also give @samp{config.status} the
@samp{--recheck} option, which makes it re-run @samp{configure} with the
same arguments you used before.  This is useful if you change
@samp{configure}.

@samp{configure} ignores any other arguments that you give it.

If your system requires unusual options for compilation or linking that
@samp{configure} doesn't know about, you can give @samp{configure}
initial values for some variables by setting them in the environment.
In Bourne-compatible shells, you can do that on the command line like
this:
@smallexample
CC='gcc -traditional' DEFS=-D_POSIX_SOURCE ./configure
@end smallexample

The @samp{make} variables that you might want to override with environment
variables when running @samp{configure} are:

(For these variables, any value given in the environment overrides the
value that @samp{configure} would choose:)
@table @samp

@item CC
C compiler program.  Default is @samp{cc}, or @samp{gcc} if @samp{gcc}
is in your PATH. 

@item INSTALL
Program to use to install files.
Default is @samp{install} if you have it, @samp{install.sh} otherwise.
@end table


(For these variables, any value given in the environment is added to
the value that @samp{configure} chooses:)
@table @samp

@item DEFS
Configuration options, in the form @samp{-Dfoo -Dbar ...}

@item LIBS
Libraries to link with, in the form @samp{-lfoo -lbar ...}
@end table

If you need to do unusual things to compile the package, we encourage
you to figure out how @samp{configure} could check whether to do them, and
mail diffs or instructions to the address given in the @samp{README} so we
can include them in the next release.


@item
Type @samp{make} to compile the package.  If you want, you can override
the @samp{make} variables @samp{CFLAGS} and @samp{LDFLAGS} like this:
@smallexample
	make CFLAGS=-O2 LDFLAGS=-s
@end smallexample

You will get some warnings from @samp{#warning} lines I've added to the
code.  Ignore them.

You may get some warnings like @samp{stdobjects.m:0: warning:
`_OBJC_SELECTOR_TABLE' defined but not used}.  Ignore them. 
They are bogus warnings due to a bug in cc1obj.

You may get some warnings like @samp{ar: filename BinaryTreeEltNode.o
truncated to BinaryTreeEltNo}.  Ignore them.


@item
If you want to compile the self-tests, cd to @samp{checks} and type
@samp{make}.  If you want to compile the examples, cd to @samp{examples}
and type @samp{make}.

@item
Type @samp{make install} to install programs, data files, and
documentation.

@item
You can remove the program binaries and object files from the source
directory by typing @samp{make clean}.  To also remove the Makefile(s),
and @samp{config.status} (all the files that @samp{configure} created),
type @samp{make distclean}.

The file @samp{configure.in} is used as a template to create
@samp{configure} by a program called @samp{autoconf}.  You will only
need it if you want to regenerate @samp{configure} using a newer version
of @samp{autoconf}.

@end enumerate
